Please do not remove this page




System Design and Modelling of an Air-breathing
Electric Propulsion Spacecraft
Gunaltay, Hamza Eren; Moloney, Rachel; Tisaev, Mansur; Baresi, Nicola; Underwood, Craig Ian; Lucca
Fabris, Andrea; Marxen, Olaf; et.al.
https://openresearch.surrey.ac.uk/esploro/outputs/conferenceProceeding/System-Design-and-Modelling-of-an/991034266402346/filesAndLinks?index
=0




Gunaltay, H. E., Moloney, R., Tisaev, M., Baresi, N., Underwood, C. I., Lucca Fabris, A., Marxen, O., & Gini, F.
(2025). System Design and Modelling of an Air-breathing Electric Propulsion Spacecraft.
https://openresearch.surrey.ac.uk/esploro/outputs/conferenceProceeding/System-Design-and-Modellin
g-of-an/991034266402346
Document Version: Author's Accepted Manuscript




Surrey Open Research repository homepage: https://openresearch.surrey.ac.uk/esploro/
openresearch@surrey.ac.uk
Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
Downloaded On 2026/03/14 18:33:35 +0000
  System Design and Modelling of an Air-breathing
          Electric Propulsion Spacecraft
                                               IEPC-2025-348
Presented at the 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London, London,
                                            United Kingdom
                                        14-19 September 2025

                 Hamza Eren Gunaltay*, Rachel Moloney, Mansur Tisaev, Nicola Baresi,
                                Craig Underwood, Andrea Lucca Fabris
                  Surrey Space Centre, University of Surrey, Guildford, GU2 7XH, UK

                                              Olaf Marxen
                    Centre for Aerodynamics, Aerospace and Automative Engineering,
                             University of Surrey, Guildford, GU2 7XH, UK

                                                        and

                                         Francesco Gini
       European Space Operation Centre, European Space Agency, Darmstadt, 64293, Germany


       Air-breathing electric propulsion (ABEP) systems offer a potential solution for sustained
   spacecraft operations in Very Low Earth Orbit (VLEO), by utilizing atmospheric particles
   as propellant, thereby reducing dependence on onboard fuel. This work presents the design,
   feasibility, and orbital performance of the ABEP spacecraft EULO, intended to operate
   near 200 km with a high resolution optical Earth observation payload. A preliminary
   550 kg spacecraft was designed to meet mass, power, and aerodynamic constraints while
   fitting within a UK based launcher, RS-1. The orbital performance of the satellite was
   simulated with a high-fidelity propagator coupled with a panel based aerodynamic force
   estimation method using gas-surface interaction models evaluated at each time step. This
   geometric framework, compared to a classic cannonball model, enables modelling of the
   spacecraft’s attitude, which in this study was held constant and either aligned with the
   orbital velocity or the local flow. Simulations on a generic ABEP spacecraft highlighted
   that misalignments with the relative flow can significantly affect orbital stability, with
   some configurations experiencing de-orbiting due to such misalignments. Furthermore,
   the EULO spacecraft demonstrated sustained a simulated flight at 255 km, achieving a
   theoretical ground sampling distance of 0.38 m and requiring the intake to have a collection
   efficiency of 50%. Nevertheless, uncertainties in the aerodynamic modelling suggests that
   improving thruster performance will be essential to mitigate these uncertainties.




* Postgraduate researcher, Surrey Space Centre, h.gunaltay@surrey.ac.uk
 Current affiliation: Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR97331, USA



            The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                           London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                          Page 1
             Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
                                      Nomenclature

  A             Area
  ARi           Intake aspect ratio
  Cnm , Snm     Spherical harmonic coefficients
  cp            Pressure coefficient
  cτ            Shear coefficient
  δ             Incidence flow angle
  e             Orbital eccentricity
  GM            Gravitational parameter
  kη            Rate of change of collection efficiency
  m             Mass of the body / Order of spherical harmonics
  n             Mean motion / Degree of spherical harmonics
  Pnm (cos θ)   Legendre polynomial
  r             Radial distance
  ρ∞            Free-stream density
  R⊕            Radius of Earth
  s             Molecular speed ratio
  σN            Normal accommodation coefficient
  σT            Tangential accommodation coefficient
  T∞            Free-stream temperature
  Tw            Wall temperature
  ub            Acceleration along orbit normal
  uv            Acceleration along velocity axis
  v∞            Free-stream velocity
  V             Gravitational potential
⃗aaero          Aerodynamic acceleration
 ⃗n             Normal direction
 ⃗τ             Shear direction
  β             Compression ratio
  ṙp           Rate of change of periapsis
  ηc            Intake collection efficiency
  ν             True anomaly
  ϕ             Longitude
  θ             Colatitude




      The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                     London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                        Page 2
       Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
                                         Acronyms
AABB   Axis-Aligned Bounding Box
ABEP   Air-Breathing Electric Propulsion
ADCS   Attitude Determination and Control Subsystem
AoA    Angle of Attack
BVH    Bounding Volume Hierarchy
CAD    Computer-aided design
DSMC   Direct Simulation Monte Carlo
EULO   Enabling Ultra Low Orbits
GSD    Ground Sample Distance
GSI    Gas Surface Interaction
RTP    Ray Tracing Panel
SRP    Solar Radiation Pressure
SSC    Surrey Space Centre
SSTL   Surrey Satellite Technologies Ltd.
TPMC   Test Particle Monte Carlo
UKSA   United Kingdom Space Agency
VLEO   Very Low Earth Orbit
VNB    Velocity–Normal–Binormal
WRF    Wind Reference Frame




        The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                       London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                        Page 3
         Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
                                             I.   Introduction
    Traditional electric propulsion systems are constrained by their limited onboard propellant supply, which
in turn restricts their operational lifespan. Air-Breathing Electric Propulsion (ABEP) is an emerging
technology designed for spacecraft operating at Very Low Earth Orbit (VLEO), typically defined as altitudes
between 100 and 450 km.1 These spacecraft offer a sustainable alternative by utilising upper atmospheric
particles as a theoretically infinite source of propellant. In an ABEP system, free atmospheric particles are
collected using an intake mechanism. These intake mechanisms are generally classified according to their
particle capture mechanism: designs that solely rely on static geometric features are considered passive,
whereas those incorporating moving components such as turbo-molecular pumps are classified as active.
In addition to capturing particles, the intake system is also responsible for slowing the particles down from
relative orbital velocities and compressing them for use as propellant. After passing the intake unit, captured
and compressed particles are fed into an electric propulsion unit, where they are accelerated again to generate
a net thrust.
    However, in VLEO where an ABEP thruster can operate, the satellite experiences significant aerodynamic
drag, which must be actively counteracted by the propulsion system. In addition to drag, the proximity to
Earth increases the satellite’s susceptibility to non-spherical gravity field of the Earth. These combined effects
necessitate the use of a high-fidelity orbital propagator. Many existing software tools, such as GMAT,2 rely
on cannonball atmospheric drag models, which fail to capture both the influence of spacecraft attitude
and the complex nature of orbital aerodynamics. Therefore, it necessitates the development of new tools
that could capture these effects. Despite these challenges, VLEO offers unique benefits, including improved
resolution for optical payloads, reduced communication latency, and the advantage of natural de-orbiting.1, 3
    This paper is organised as follows: Section II describes the Enabling Ultra Low Orbits (EULO) spacecraft
designed to operate in VLEO and the associated design considerations while Section III discusses the high-
fidelity orbit propagator and the aerodynamic estimation methods used in this research, along with key
considerations, and a discussion of the associated limitations. Section IV presents preliminary findings on
the VLEO and ABEP satellites, simulated using a GOCE4 like satellite and specifications of an ABEP
thruster working with N2 -O2 mixtures.5 Building upon the findings of this section, Section V demonstrates
the detailed aerodynamics and the flight envelope of the EULO spacecraft. Finally, Section VI provides
conclusions from this study.

                          II.   Air-Breathing Satellite System Design
    The spacecraft design is primarily dictated by the mission objectives and payload requirements. In this
study, the payload chosen was an optical Earth observation instrument designed to be operating in a 200 km
circular orbit. Furthermore, the satellite design was carried out with adaptability in mind, in order to ensure
suitability for potential future constellation deployments. Additionally, at such low altitudes, compactness
is critical, as protruding structures significantly increase aerodynamic drag. To mitigate this, the telescope
was housed within the spacecraft body, with a 45◦ mirror used to direct incoming light to the optical system.
A Cassegrain configuration was selected despite its complexity, as it minimises the required volume while
meeting the performance requirements. A schematic of this configuration was illustrated in Fig. 1. The
primary objective of the payload was to achieve a Ground Sample Distance (GSD) of approximately 0.3 m
at the red end of the panchromatic band. According to the Rayleigh criterion, this necessitated a minimum
aperture diameter of about 53 cm. Allowing margin for fittings and shrouds, the aperture was rounded to
60 cm.
    In addition to the optical payload and reflecting mirror, the spacecraft must also accommodate the bus
subsystems, auxiliary sensors, and the intake system required for the ABEP thruster. Preliminary estimates,
consistent with previous studies,1, 7 indicated that at least two thrusters providing 7 mN of thrust each would
be necessary to maintain orbit. Initially, for additional robustness, a third thruster of equivalent performance
was included as a design margin. This configuration required a relatively wide and elongated intake. Initial
designs assumed an intake diameter of approximately 1 m with a length of about 1.5 m. Recent findings
have shown that maintaining orbits at such low altitudes would necessitate an active compression system,7
which would further increase the system size. To prevent excessive growth, a constraint was imposed that
the spacecraft must remain compatible with UK-based launchers. Specifically, the RS1 launch vehicle was
selected as the baseline reference for defining the spacecraft’s maximum allowable dimensions.8


             The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                            London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                                    Page 4
              Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
                                 Figure 1. Cassegrain Telescope Schematic6



    Following the iterative design process and the choice of the launch vehicle, initial spacecraft had to be
modified to avoid the excessive volume that would have been occupied by a single large intake. Instead, three
separate intakes were adopted, each connected to an individual thruster. To ensure adequate airflow to the
thrusters, the diameter of each intake was scaled to approximately 72 cm. This configuration necessitated
an increase in the spacecraft’s overall diameter. Similarly, to efficiently utilise the payload fairing of the
RS1 launch vehicle, a circular cross-section of 1.6 m in diameter was selected. However, this configuration
resulted on a larger satellite than initial intentions which made the third thruster a necessity rather then
redundancy. Furthermore, the use of three intakes motivated the adoption of a nonagonal perimeter for the
spacecraft structure, which provided geometric symmetry and optimised use of the available volume. The
nonagonal cross-section was defined such that its innermost circumscribed circle had a diameter of 1.6 m.
    The RS1 payload fairing, given the diameter of 1.6 m, permits a maximum spacecraft height of roughly
3 m. Within this volume, the intake system occupies about 1 m length. Modular avionics boxes, mounted
on the back plate, are estimated to require an additional 20 cm. This allocation leaves approximately 1.8 m
available for the payload and optical assembly. Taking the diameter of the 45◦ mirror to be 65 cm for the
optical assembly, this leaves about 1.15 m for the telescope itself. With a Cassegrain configuration, this
length is sufficient to accommodate an optical system with an effective focal length of about 6.7 m. Coupled
with a detector pixel size of 10 µm, the system yields a ground sample distance of roughly 0.3 m, with an
f-number of approximately f/11.
    The authors would like to acknowledge that dedicated research on intake design has been carried out;
however, as this work has not yet concluded, it is not presented in this paper. For representation purposes in
the present study, parabolic bucket-type intakes were adopted in the illustrative configurations in following
Fig. 2 and 3.




Figure 2. Stowed configuration of the ABEP spacecraft. The figure shows the satellite accommodated within
the RS1 fairing (right) and outside the fairing (left).




             The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                            London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                                Page 5
              Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
                      Figure 3. ABEP spacecraft “EULO” in deployed configuration.



A.   Power Systems
Preliminary estimates indicate that the three thrusters require approximately 2 kW of DC electrical power
during operation. To ensure uninterrupted operation, the spacecraft must also be able to withstand a worse
case eclipse periods of up to 37 minutes. This necessities on board batteries. The battery system is sized
such that three units, mounted symmetrically on the nonagonal body, provide a nominal continuous supply
of 1 kW. To accommodate peak demand, the system is designed to deliver up to 3 kW if required.
    For the solar panels, a panel size of 100 × 55 cm was assumed with 150 quad junction solar cells. Under
                                                              2
direct illumination, with a nominal solar flux of 1367 W/m and cell efficiency of 32%, each panel provides
approximately 195 W of power. This implies that a single side panel of the nonagonal satellite could provide
up to 585 W of power. While the entire spacecraft body would theoretically yield 5265 W, when the Sun
illumination is normal to one side, shadowing and limited rays reaching the panels reduce to output to
roughly 1.7 kW. Therefore it necessitates the use of additional deployable solar panels.
    To address this, the design includes three cranked deployable panels, each accommodating four arrays,
with two of the arrays bent at an interior angle of 140◦ . When illuminated normally, these panels would
be capable of generating approximately 733 W. In addition, a motorised solar tail unit provides a further
390 W. Altogether, the configuration allows for a worst-case power generation of about 2.8 kW. Moreover,
the motorised solar tail units can also contribute to active attitude control. Nevertheless, the authors would
like to acknowledge that the motorised panels behind the propulsion unit may introduce disturbances due to
plasma plume interactions. The issue remains under investigation and will be assessed in future work. This
was further illustrated in Fig. 3.

B.   Final Spacecraft Configuration
Due to the inclusion of three intakes in the spacecraft design, majority of the frontal surface is covered
by structural walls rather than intake openings. Therefore, a nose cone was introduced at the front of
the spacecraft. The RS1 fairing allows for a sharp nose cone with a height of up to 50 cm. Preliminary
investigations using the panel-based drag model, with both conical and parabolic geometries, indicated that
a parabolic profile offers slightly improved aerodynamic performance. Consequently, the final configuration
adopted a parabolic nose cone. To accommodate the intake openings, the relevant sections of the nose
were cut flat. Finally, based on preliminary subsystem estimates, including structure, power systems, intake
assemblies, Attitude Determination and Control Subsystem (ADCS), avionics stacks, the total platform dry
mass is expected to be approximately 550 kg. The final ABEP spacecraft EULO is illustrated in Fig. 2 and 3.
Figure 2 shows the spacecraft with the panels stowed (left) and accommodated within the fairing volume
(right), while Figure 3 depicts the spacecraft in its deployed configuration.

             The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                            London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                                Page 6
              Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
                     III.      Orbit Propagation in Very Low Earth Orbit
    An orbital propagator is a tool in astrodynamics for predicting the future position and velocity of
an orbiting object by numerically propagating its equations of motion.7 In VLEO, orbital perturbations
are dominated by aerodynamic drag resulting from interactions between the spacecraft and the upper
atmospheric particles, as well as gravitational disturbances arising from the Earth’s non-spherical shape
and the third body influence of the Moon and the Sun.9 To capture these effects, this study employs a high-
fidelity propagator previously developed by the authors.7 The following subsections describe the dynamics
model implemented in the tool, along with the improvements introduced for this study.

A.   Perturbations Due to Planetary Bodies
The gravitational influence of third bodies, specifically the Moon and the Sun, introduces perturbations
that affect both the satellite’s orbit and the motion of the Earth itself. The gravitational potential, Vtb ,
created by these third bodies is determined from the relative position of the external body with respect to
the satellite’s position. Equation (1) highlights the perturbing potential of the third-body where GMtb is
the gravitational parameter of the third body, r is the distance from satellite to the main planetary body, rtb
is the distance from main planetary body to the third-body. The bold symbols denote their corresponding
vector representations.

                                              GMtb r2
                                                                        
                                                              (r · rtb )
                                       Vtb =
                                               rtb      2 −3
                                                       rtb         2
                                                                 rtb
                                                                                                            (1)

    In addition to third body effects, motion in VLEO is subject to strong perturbations due to the non-
spherical gravity field of Earth. Equation (2) expresses the gravitational potential of the main planetary
body, Earth, where, GM is the gravitational parameter of the Earth, R⊕ is Earth’s mean equatorial radius,
r, θ, ϕ are spherical coordinates (radial distance, colatitude, longitude), Cnm , Snm are spherical harmonic
coefficients of degree n and order m and Pnm (cos θ) are the associated Legendre polynomials.10
                                     ∞ X n     n                                       
                              GM     X        R⊕                               
            Vsh (r, θ, ϕ) =       1−                  Cnm cos(mϕ) + Snm sin(mϕ) Pnm (cos θ)                      (2)
                               r     n=2 m=0
                                               r

   The coefficients for degrees and orders of the spherical harmonics were obtained from GGM05C.11 All
frame transformations and the computation of distances from the central body to other planetary bodies
were performed using SPICE kernels.12

B.   Atmospheric Drag in the Rarefied Regime
The accelerations induced by atmospheric forces are expressed in Eq. (3) where ρ∞ is the free-stream density,
                                                          ⃗ F is the non-dimensional force coefficient, m is the
v∞ is the free stream velocity, Aref is a reference area, C
                            ⃗
mass of the spacecraft and F is the aerodynamic force vector. Many software tools available in the literature
estimate the drag forces using a “cannonball” drag model with a constant drag force coefficient. However,
to obtain a representative drag coefficient for VLEO conditions, it is necessary to vectorise the coefficient,
thereby allowing the influence of spacecraft attitude to be incorporated.

                                                     F⃗           2
                                                           1 ρ ∞ v∞      ⃗F
                                                                    Aref C
                                          ⃗aaero =      =                                                         (3)
                                                     m     2        m
    Moreover, the flow conditions in VLEO differ from those encountered by conventional aircraft, a more
detailed explanation can be found in Ref. 1. Furthermore, estimating the aerodynamic acceleration requires
accurate knowledge of the atmospheric density. Consistent with previous studies,1, 7 the present work also
employs the NRLMSISE-00 atmospheric density model13 which estimates atmospheric density as a function
of location, day of the year, and space weather conditions such as solar and geomagnetic activity. Moreover,
this paper also employed a panel-based force estimation model,7 in which the spacecraft is subdivided into
n flat panels to compute the aerodynamic forces acting on its surface. The total aerodynamic force is then
defined by Eq. (4) where, n′ is the number of panels directly exposed to the flow, cτ is the shear force
coefficient, cp is the pressure force coefficient, ⃗τ is the unit vector in the shear force direction, ⃗n is the unit
vector in the normal force direction and i indexes the ith panel.

              The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                             London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                                      Page 7
               Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
                                                       ′
                                                n
                                              2 X
                                      ⃗   ρ∞ v∞
                                      F =         (cτ,i⃗τi − cp,i⃗ni ) Ai                                 (4)
                                            2 i=1

    For each exposed (non-shadowed) panel, the aerodynamic force coefficients are computed using Gas
Surface Interaction (GSI) models, which describe how individual gas particles interact with a surface at the
molecular level. Detailed descriptions of these models can be found in Ref. 14. Following the approach used
in previous research,1 the present work employs Schaaf’s15 GSI model, expressed in Eq. (5) and Eq. (6).
In these expressions, σN and σT are the normal and tangential momentum accommodation coefficients,
respectively, s is the molecular speed ratio,1 δ is the angle between the surface normal and the free-stream
velocity vector, Tw is the wall temperature, T∞ is the free-stream temperature, and erf(·) denotes the
error function. To maintain consistency with the previous research,1 tangential and normal momentum
accommodation coefficients were assumed to be equal to each other.
                                                              r       !
                                 1    2 − σN              σN Tw            2   2
                           cp = 2       √      s cos(δ) +               e−s cos (δ)
                                s          π               2     T∞
                                                                     r               !
                                                2    2      1      σN πTw
                               + [2 − σN ] s cos (δ) +          +             s cos(δ)                    (5)
                                                            2       2     T∞
                                                      !
                               × (1 + erf(s cos(δ)))

                            σT sin(δ)                     √
                                      exp −s2 cos2 (δ) + s π cos(δ) (1 + erf(s cos(δ)))
                                                                                      
                     cτ =      √                                                                          (6)
                              s π
    Similarly, the free-stream (relative) velocity of particles impacting the spacecraft was computed by
incorporating atmospheric wind contributions from the HWM07 model.7 Two spacecraft attitudes were
considered in this study. First, the spacecraft attitude was defined with a constant alignment to the
Velocity–Normal–Binormal (VNB) frame7 where the x-axis points towards the orbital velocity vector, the
y-axis points toward the direction of the orbital angular momentum vector and the z-axis completes the
right-triad. Second, the attitude was expressed in the Wind Reference Frame (WRF), defined by a rotation
from the VNB frame based on the satellite’s angle of attack and sideslip angle, thereby generating zero angle
of attack and zero sideslip. A comparison of these frame alignments were presented in the following sections
and illustrated in Fig. 4 and 5.

C.   Shadowing Algorithm
The shadow detection algorithm employed in this work is based on the implementation available in ADBSat,14
which determines whether a given panel is exposed to the free-stream flow, or occluded by other spacecraft




     Figure 4. Illustration of the VNB frame.16
                                                               Figure 5. Illustration of the WRF frame.



             The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                            London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                               Page 8
              Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
                   Figure 6. Comparison of runtimes with and without BVH acceleration.



surfaces, using a fast pseudo ray-tracing approach. Although the original implementation is efficient for
single evaluation, it becomes a computational bottleneck in orbital propagation, where the algorithm must
be executed repeatedly at each integration step, particularly when the spacecraft attitude evolves with time.
For simple and small geometries, the effect of shadowing computations is negligible since the number of
surface panels is relatively small. However, for more complex spacecraft meshes, the computational cost
becomes significant. This limitation could be addressed either by employing a lookup table, where data are
precomputed and attitude angles are coarsely rounded to the nearest available estimate, or alternatively
through the use of a Bounding Volume Hierarchy (BVH), which has been shown to substantially accelerate
ray-tracing algorithms.17
    BVH is a technique commonly used in computer graphics, where geometric objects are organised into
a hierarchical tree of simple nested bounding volumes such as spheres or cubes. During ray-tracing, this
structure enables entire groups of objects to be excluded from consideration if their bounding volume is not
intersected, thereby reducing the number of costly intersection tests. This approach is particularly effective
for high-resolution meshes, where the computational expense of direct intersection checks can otherwise
dominate the runtime.17 A simple bounding box methodology, known as the Axis-Aligned Bounding Box
(AABB), is widely used in general ray-tracing applications. It works by enclosing objects within a small
rectangular box, allowing algorithm to quickly discard rays that do not intersect those boxes. Similar
approaches have also been applied in the literature, where AABB methods were previously implemented for
Solar Radiation Pressure (SRP) computations and demonstrated to be effective.18
    In this study, the AABB filter was also implemented, as it could be directly integrated into the original
ADBSat pseudo ray-tracing algorithm. Since the original approach from Ref. 14 already reduces the
shadowing problem to two dimensions, an AABB was constructed for each potentially shadowing back-facing
triangle by enclosing it within the smallest axis-aligned rectangle in the y–z plane of the WRF frame, as its
x-axis is aligned with the relative flow vector. During the pseudo ray-tracing procedure, if the centroid of
front facing panel does not fall within this bounding box, the intersection check is skipped and the algorithm
proceeds to the next panel. The algorithm was also ported to a CUDA19 environment, with the AABB
construction performed on the CPU, as pre-computing them on the host was more efficient than generating
them directly on the GPU. The remaining shadowing procedure was executed on the GPU to take advantage
of parallelisation.
    The results in Fig.6 demonstrate the runtime differences between the preliminary algorithms executed
with and without BVH acceleration. The comparison was performed using the satellite geometry described in
Sec. II, evaluated at zero degrees angle of attack and side-slip. It should be noted that the speed-up achieved
with BVH depends on both the geometric complexity and the mesh resolution, with greater improvements

             The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                            London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                                 Page 9
              Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
observed for larger and more detailed meshes. All computations were performed on an NVIDIA RTX
A4500 GPU through a MATLAB MEX interface implemented in C++/CUDA. Both implementations were
verified against the original ADBSat algorithm for the satellite geometry defined in Sec. II. Across randomly
generated attitude cases, both versions produced consistent results, with only minor discrepancies observed
for configurations where the angle of attack or sideslip was smaller than 0.1◦ . These discrepancies, however,
always corresponded to less than 0.01% of the spacecraft’s total surface area. These differences are attributed
to numerical tolerances associated with nearly parallel surfaces, as noted in the original ADBSat study.14
The runtimes presented on the Fig. 6 correspond to averages over 1000 integration steps. Further discussions
on the general results of the algorithm, and its associated limitations are provided in Sec. IV.

D.    Air-Breathing Propulsion Considerations
In addition to the models described in the previous sections, implementation of an ABEP system introduces
further constraints and perturbations. One of the most significant constraints is the presence of an intake.
Since the intake is designed to capture atmospheric particles, the resulting particle-surface interactions
slightly differ due to multi scattering. Furthermore, an ABEP system must also decelerate the incoming
particles, which further modifies the perturbations generated by the spacecraft. Following the approach in a
previous study,1 these effects are represented through the concept of collection efficiency, ηc , defined as the
fraction of particles reaching the downstream end of the collection unit relative to those entering the intake.
    The fraction of particles that do not reach the end of the intake unit is assumed to contribute to drag in
the same manner as interactions with the external spacecraft surfaces. This effective reduction in exposed
surface area is represented in the Computer-aided design (CAD) model by scaling down the corresponding
panel areas. The remaining particles that reach the downstream end of the intake are assumed to fully
exchange their momenta to the spacecraft, and the resulting perturbation is given by Eqn. (7). In this
expression, Aintake denotes the effective cross-sectional area of the intake, while î1 represents the unit vector
aligned with the spacecraft body x-axis.
                                                    ηc ρ∞ Aintake v∞
                                          ⃗aintake =                 î1                                  (7)
                                                            m
    Furthermore, to estimate the passive compression ratio, the formulation presented in Ref. 20 was adopted,
consistent with the approach used in previous studies,1, 7 and is expressed in Eq. (8). In this equation,
β denotes the passive compression ratio, while ARi is the intake aspect ratio. Unlike previous studies,
the present work further introduces a variability in the collection efficiency to account for misalignment
between the intake axis and the free-stream velocity vector. This effect is represented by a simple linear
model, expressed by Eq. (9) where ηc,0 is the nominal collection efficiency at zero misalignment, δ is the
misalignment angle, and kη is a proportionality coefficient defining the rate of efficiency reduction with
increasing misalignment. Nevertheless, the variation in collection efficiency is dependent on factors such as
the intake geometry and flow conditions. To simplify the present analysis, the proportionality coefficient
was assumed to correspond to a reduction of 0.01 per degree of misalignment. The detailed investigation of
these effects was left as future work.
                                                                          
                                                              189
                     β = 0.87 β0 (0.244 + 0.33 ln (ARi ))           + 0.435 (1 − 1.625 ηc )               (8)
                                                            Tw + 33

                                               ηc (δ) = ηc,0 − δ kη                                           (9)

     IV.   Flight Simulation and Orbit-Keeping with an Air-Breathing Thruster
A.    Orbit control
Orbital control in the VLEO environment poses unique challenges due to the continuous effect of atmospheric
drag. Thrusting at inappropriate intervals, such as near periapsis, primarily influences the apoapsis and can
have an overall detrimental effect on the orbit stability. In previous research,7 a control parameter was
introduced based on Gauss’s variational equations,21 specifically derived from the rate of change of the
periapsis, as defined in Eqn. (10). In this expression, n represents the mean motion of the satellite, ν is
the true anomaly, and e is the orbital eccentricity. The terms uv and ub denote the thrust accelerations


             The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                            London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                                   Page 10
              Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
along the velocity and orbit-normal directions, respectively. Assuming a spacecraft attitude alignment to
the VNB frame, the thrust vector would be aligned only with the orbital velocity direction. Consequently,
the orbit-plane component ub was set to zero. The remaining term, excluding the mean motion contribution,
was then defined as the control parameter kp , as given in Eqn. (11).
                                     s
                                   2     (1 − e)3 (1 − cos ν)2          r
                             ṙp =                                uv − sin ν ub                      (10)
                                   n (1 + 2e cos ν + e2 )(1 + e)        ν
                                           s
                                                 (1 − e)3 (1 − cos ν)2
                                     kp = 2                                                          (11)
                                              (1 + 2e cos ν + e2 )(1 + e)
    For orbit control, the previous study7 identified a threshold value of 0.3 for the control parameter, with
the thruster getting activated whenever this value is exceeded. In the present work, the same parameter is
adopted for control. Similarly, the thruster operating conditions defined in Ref. 1 were also applied, setting
the lower limits of the mass flow rate and number density to 6 sccm and 1018 m−3 , respectively. The authors
acknowledge that in Ref. 7, a constant mass flow rate of 0.1 mg/s was used, independent of the atmospheric
composition. During the subsequent trials, it was observed that the 6 sccm limit produced more optimistic
results compared to using an approximate mg/s mass flow rate, specifically in edge cases where sustained
flight was marginal. A more detailed discussion of this effect as well as the influence of control parameter
on the WRF frame, is provided in the following section.

B.   Flight Simulations
A GOCE-like spacecraft configuration was first employed to demonstrate the differences arising from the
attitude alignment in the WRF frame and to study the influence of the varying collection efficiency. The
spacecraft model used in the propagation is illustrated in Fig. 7. A total solar panel area of 1.4 m2 was
assumed, along with 200 kg spacecraft mass.7 Similarly, the intake was represented as a reduction in the
frontal area for varying intake diameters as discussed in Sec. III. Moreover, for this analysis, due to the
simplicity of the shape, no shadowing algorithm was utilised.
    The simulations were carried out using the GGM05C gravity field truncated at degree and order 50×50.11
Third-body perturbations from the Sun and Moon were modelled as point masses. Aerodynamic effects were
estimated with an accommodation coefficient of 0.9 and a wall temperature of 400 K. Solar and geomagnetic
activity were held constant, with a solar flux of 140 sfu (1.4 ×10−20 W m−2 Hz−1 ) and a geomagnetic index
of Ap = 15. All simulations were initialized at the J2000 epoch, with the corresponding state vector provided
in Table 2. Furthermore, the thruster was assumed to be a RIT-10 tested with N2 -O2 mixtures5 producing
a constant thrust of 7.16 mN when operational.




                                                              Component           X        Y        Z
                                                              Position [km]     146.7    -700.7   6529.9
                                                              Velocity [km/s]   -7.624   -1.596     0

                                                         Table 2.    Initial State of GOCE-like in J2000
                                                         Coordinates.




Figure 7. Illustration of the GOCE-like spacecraft.



             The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                            London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                               Page 11
              Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
    Simulations were initially conducted using the same intake diameters and efficiencies used in Ref. 7, with
the success criterion defined as a flight time of 300 days. The tests were performed with control values, kp ,
ranging from 0.2 to 0.5, which did not affect the success criterion. These initial simulations were carried
out using only a passive intake, with the compression ratio defined by Eq. (8). However, this configuration
resulted in re-entry within a short time frame for all cases. To further investigate this affect, the intake
wall temperature in Eq. (8) was set independently. Lowering this value was found to be beneficial, and
an extreme optimistic case was assumed using a wall temperature of 200 K. Nevertheless, even under this
assumption, all cases still resulted in re-entry within a short time frame. Therefore, subsequently, all cases
were assumed such that an active stage was able to provide a constant compression ratio of 300.
    Furthermore, in contrast to the representative constant mass flow rate of 0.1 mg/s used in Ref. 7, the
present study applied a limit of 6 sccm. Since this value varies along the orbit as a function of atmospheric
composition and related effects, it was found to introduce a beneficial impact on the results. In particular,
some edge cases that previously failed were able to sustain flight. For example, a configuration with an intake
diameter of 45 cm and an intake efficiency of 40% aligned with VNB frame, achieved successful flight under
this assumption, whereas it did not in Ref. 7. This improvement is attributed to the small but noticeable
fluctuations in the required mass flow rate (expressed in mg/s), as discussed in Ref. 1. These findings
highlight that many cases operate under marginal flight conditions and underscore the importance of either
developing robust control methodologies or ensuring that the thrusters are capable of generating additional
thrust.
    The outcomes of the overall simulations are summarized in Table 3, including the corresponding attitude
alignments for the case with kp > 0.3. In the VNB alignment case, the intake collection efficiency was
also varied with respect to the angle as described in Sec. III. It can be observed from the table that
attitude alignment influenced the orbital performance: in several cases the VNB alignment resulted in
mission failure, whereas the attitude aligned with WRF enabled sustained flight. One such case is illustrated
in Fig. 8, corresponding to a spacecraft with a 36 cm inlet diameter and 45% intake efficiency. It should be
noted, however, that in all of these tests the thruster was assumed to fire along the spacecraft body axis.
Consequently, for the VNB alignment a thrust-vector misalignment exists, which may have contributed to the
unfavourable results. This aspect could be investigated and mitigated further in future work by considering
thrusters with adjustable tilt. However, this was beyond the scope of the current research.
    Nevertheless, it was also observed that for WRF alignment under kp > 0.5 control the satellite performed


                         Table 3. ABEP Simulation results for control with kp > 0.3

 Intake Diameter       Attitude Alignment         Efficiency (ηc,0 )   Success    Mean Altitude [km]
                            VNB & WRF                    0.50          Success               205
        36 cm                 WRF                        0.45          Success               200
                               VNB                       0.45           Fail                N/A
                                VNB                ηc ∈ [0.40, 0.50]   Success            210-220
        45 cm
                                WRF                ηc ∈ [0.40, 0.50]   Success            215-220
                            VNB & WRF              ηc ∈ [0.40, 0.45]   Success               220
                            VNB & WRF                    0.30           Fail                N/A
        50 cm
                              WRF                        0.35          Success               215
                               VNB                       0.35           Fail                N/A
                            VNB & WRF                    0.40          Success               225
                            VNB & WRF                    0.30           Fail                N/A
        55 cm
                              WRF                        0.35          Success              220
                               VNB                       0.35           Fail                N/A
                            VNB & WRF              ηc ∈ [0.35, 0.40]   Success            225-230
        60 cm
                            VNB & WRF                    0.30           Fail               N/A



             The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                            London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                                Page 12
              Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
Figure 8. Comparison of WRF and VNB alignments for the GOCE-like satellite with 36 cm diameter and
45% intake efficiency.




Figure 9. Effect of control parameter on WRF and VNB alignments for a GOCE-like satellite with 60 cm
diameter spacecraft and 35% intake efficiency.



more stably, as the orbit exhibited less variability in altitude, although this did not alter the overall success
criterion. This is illustrated in Fig. 9 for a spacecraft with a 60 cm inlet diameter and 35% intake efficiency.
Moreover, while the WRF alignment was generally more successful, the methodology of the kp control,
assuming perfect alignment with the VNB frame, appeared to negatively influence orbital stability. In
particular, in cases where both alignment strategies resulted in sustained flight, the WRF frame was more
susceptible to destabilization, with the orbital eccentricity exhibiting significant variation over the 300-day
period. A more detailed investigation of this effect is left for future work.




             The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                            London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                                  Page 13
              Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
                   V.    Flight Simulation and Orbit-Keeping of EULO
A.   Aerodynamic Analysis
The aerodynamics of the EULO spacecraft, described in Sec. II, were first investigated using a Test Particle
Monte Carlo (TPMC) simulation performed with SPARTA.22 The test particle method was preferred over
the Direct Simulation Monte Carlo (DSMC) approach, as it was computationally faster. Although initial
trials were conducted at an altitude of 200 km, it was found that compensating for the total drag at this
altitude would be unfeasible for the spacecraft. Consequently, the analysis was carried out at a target
altitude of 240 km, identified as an approximate equilibrium point between available thrust and atmospheric
drag, and this altitude is adopted throughout this section. Moreover, in order to simplify and align with the
previous methodologies the intakes were completely blocked and assumed to be flat plates with 0% collection
efficiency.
     TPMC simulations were performed using the conditions summarized in Table 4, employing a Maxwellian
reflection model with an accommodation coefficient of 0.9 and a wall temperature of 400 K. To ensure
statistical convergence, the simulations were continued until a steady state was reached, defined as the point
where the drag coefficient curve over time exhibited a stable plateau. After this point, results were averaged
over an additional 400,000 time-steps to improve accuracy. All aerodynamic forces were reported in terms of
non-dimensional force coefficients, obtained by normalising the computed forces with respect to the reference
area of 2.14 m2 .
     The conditions used for the TPMC simulations were also applied to the Ray Tracing Panel (RTP) method,
which is the panel model with shadowing enabled, in order to provide a direct comparison. The RTP analysis
was carried out on three different surface meshes of increasing resolution, ranging from 10,000 to 145,000
elements. In all cases, small but noticeable discrepancies were observed in the results, caused mainly by
shadowing effects. A key issue identified was that the RTP method consistently failed, regardless of mesh
resolution, when the spacecraft was perfectly aligned with the flow at 0 degrees Angle of Attack (AoA).
This limitation was traced to the original shortcoming of the ray-tracing algorithm, as was also discussed by
their developers in Ref. 14. The corresponding results of this aerodynamic analysis are shown in Fig. 10 (a)
where the force coefficients were normalised into a single dimension for representation purposes. To ensure
the overall aerodynamic trends remained visible in the figure, additional RTP cases were computed at a very
small incidence (AoA = 0.001◦ ).
     Nevertheless, the sudden and unstable behaviour noticed at the 0◦ flow incidence motivated a more
detailed investigation into the ray-tracing procedure, which revealed that at shallow incidence angles (below
2◦ ) the bottom part of the solar panels located on the rear of the spacecraft were incorrectly identified as
non-shadowed. This artefact was addressed by excluding such panels from the analysis, since under the
small incidence angles considered in this study they would in practice be fully occluded. These aerodynamic
results are shown in Fig. 10 (b).
     To investigate the impact of applying the shadowing approach for 0◦ incidence, Blender23 was used to
identify the shadowed surface areas, which were subsequently excluded from the aerodynamic computation.
For incident flow at 0◦ angle of attack, the resulting force coefficient was found to be considerably lower
than the surrounding cases, as highlighted by the green star in Fig. 10. To further analyse this shadowing
effect, the 42k-element mesh model was employed in TPMC to obtain the average aerodynamic force acting
on each mesh element. These values were also computed over the course of the simulation and subsequently
averaged across 400,000 time-steps after steady state had been reached. For visualization, the elemental
forces were normalized and clamped such that their total contribution summed to 99% of the overall force.


                    Table 4. Flow conditions and species composition used in the TPMC

                                  Flow conditions               Species composition
                        Flow velocity         7760.7 m/s        He        0.24%
                        Flow temperature         921 K          O        70.31%
                        Flow density       2.53×1015 m−3        N2       27.93%
                        Reference area          2.14 m2         O2        0.89%
                                                                N         0.61%


             The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                            London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                               Page 14
              Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
Figure 10. Comparison of single-dimensional force coefficients of EULO spacecraft versus angle of attack with
different methods and approaches as described in the text.



The resulting distribution, is presented on a logarithmic scale as an overall combination of shear stress and
pressure in Fig. 11 (a).
    It was observed that although most of the spacecraft body is shielded from the free stream by the nose
cone, the TPMC results indicate that particles still reach these regions through thermal motion or gas–surface
scattering mechanisms, with the exception of a small area immediately behind the intake unit which remains
fully shielded. This behaviour highlights an inherent limitation of the RTP approach, which assumes
complete occlusion of such surfaces. Similarly, Fig. 11 (b) presents the corresponding panel estimation
without shadowing effects for the same simulation condition. In this case, the overall magnitudes predicted
without shadowing are broadly consistent with the TPMC results, except in the intake channels where
multiple scattering effects lead the panel method to misrepresent the forces. The overall force coefficient
obtained from the panel method by removing the TPMC identified shadowed regions is also shown in Fig. 10,
marked by the blue dot.
    Similarly, the case with a 3◦ angle of attack was also analysed. The results are shown in Fig. 12 (a)
for TPMC and Fig. 12 (b) for the RTP method. Comparable trends to 0◦ case were observed at the
intake channels, where multiple scattering effects again play a significant role in the differences between the
two approaches. In addition, small disruption patterns appear on the inlet in the RTP results, caused by
the shadowing algorithm incorrectly identifying certain surfaces as occluded and removing them from the
computation.
    Furthermore, differences were observed on the upper surface (+z), where the RTP method again produced
shadowing behaviour that differed from the TPMC results. This discrepancy can be attributed to the same
artefacts noted in earlier cases. By contrast, the bottom surface (–z) generally showed good agreement,
apart from a small region missed in the RTP computation. It is also worth noting that when shadowing was
evaluated separately using Blender, the entire bottom surface was marked as shadowed. Since “shadow” in
the RTP method corresponds strictly to an occlusion check, this treatment is not fully accurate, as such
surfaces clearly still contribute to the aerodynamics, as confirmed by the TPMC results. These effects are
left for future investigation, as they fall beyond the scope of the present paper.
    Overall, the comparison shows that the results remain within a 1% relative error margin. This residual
difference likely arises from the combination of an underprediction of the forces in the intake unit and an
overprediction on the side panels. For reference, at 0◦ angle of attack, the TPMC results and the panel

             The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                            London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                                Page 15
              Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
Figure 11. Combined aerodynamic shear & pressure distribution from the (a) TPMC & (b) Panel Method of
the EULO spacecraft at 0◦ angle of attack.




Figure 12. Combined aerodynamic shear & pressure distribution from the (a) TPMC & (b) RTP Method of
the EULO spacecraft at 3◦ angle of attack.



method corrected with TPMC-based shadowing still differed by approximately 5% relative error.
    Moreover, for cases where the rear surfaces that had been falsely flagged as non-shadowed were excluded,
as shown in Fig. 10 (b), the results generally aligned within 1% relative error between the RTP and TPMC
methods for both the 10k and 42k element mesh models. Although the previously discussed uncertainties
remain with the RTP approach, and TPMC is inherently more reliable, performing a TPMC simulation at
every step of an orbital propagation is computationally infeasible. Given the close agreement observed in
the present comparisons, including the full three-dimensional force coefficients, which are not shown here,
the RTP method was adopted for the subsequent analyses. For the WRF alignment, satellite shadowing
was predefined, while for the VNB alignment a restriction was imposed on angles below 0.001◦ , which were
instead evaluated at small non-zero angles to prevent failures of the algorithm adversely affecting the results.


             The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                            London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                                 Page 16
              Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
B.   Flight Simulations
Building upon the orbit analysis presented in Sec. IV, the flight simulations of the EULO spacecraft
were performed under the assumption that active compression would be required throughout the mission.
Furthermore, as the spacecraft is equipped with three thrusters, the minimum mass flow, and thrust were
each scaled by a factor of three. The thrusters were assumed to operate simultaneously, as each thruster unit
was assumed to be fed by a single intake. Therefore, even if the conditions were sufficient to operate only
one or two of them, the algorithm did not trigger any thruster. This effect is beyond the scope of the present
study; however, future research could investigate this aspect in more detail and propose improvements to
the overall design and control of the spacecraft. For the purposes of this analysis, the thrusters were again
assumed to be the RIT-10 working with N2 -O2 mixtures.5
    The initial orbital state for the simulations was updated relative to the values used in the GOCE-like
reference case, as listed in Table 5. For consistency across all simulations, the control with a kp > 0.3 was
implemented. The solar and geomagnetic conditions were kept identical to those used in the earlier analyses,
and the same aerodynamic and gravity models were retained.
    The initial set of simulations was conducted with the attitude aligned to the WRF frame while the
shadowing was predefined, as discussed in the previous section. A key issue encountered was that when
DSMC-based shadowing was applied, the resulting drag was significantly higher than in any other case.
Conversely, when the ray-tracing shadowing was used, the drag was considerably lower than with any other
predictions, representing an overly optimistic scenario. To ensure a conservative assessment, it was therefore
decided that the initial analysis would be performed using DSMC-based shadowing, representing a worst-
case condition. Consistent with the previous section, a success criterion of 300 days of sustained flight was
adopted.
    For this analysis, the intake collection efficiency was varied between 35% and 60% in 5% increments,
while the compression ratio constraint was removed. The results indicated that for efficiencies of 35%–45%,
the spacecraft was unable to sustain flight, as the minimum mass flow requirement to the thrusters could
not be satisfied enough to sustain the orbit. By contrast, for efficiencies of 50% and above, the spacecraft
successfully maintained its orbit throughout the simulation period. To analyse the overall compression ratio,
the case with 50% intake efficiency was assessed against the minimum compression required to satisfy the
density flow condition. This comparison is shown in Fig. 13, where the orange line indicates the regions in
which the mass flow requirement was simultaneously met. The threshold was found to lie between an overall
compression ratios of approximately 560 and 600. This threshold was verified again by reintroducing the
compression ratio constraint, with values ranging from 500 to 660 in increments of 33. The results confirmed
that all cases with compression ratios below 566 resulted in re-entry, whereas those at or above 566 were
able to sustain flight.
    The same initial state was then simulated using the ray-tracing based shadowing model in WRF frame.
In this case, the orbital evolution followed the same general trends as in the DSMC-based analysis, with the
exception that the 45% intake efficiency case was also able to sustain flight, as illustrated in Fig. 14. Based
on the DSMC results, the true performance is expected to lie between the two shadowing assumptions.
Consequently, a conservative minimum intake collection efficiency of 50% needs to be targeted for the
EULO spacecraft. Following these results, the analysis was extended to the VNB frame attitude alignment.
Although the initial plan was to use the 42k-element mesh model, the simulations were instead carried out
with the 10k-element mesh due to computational time constraints. Similar to the WRF alignment cases,
the compression ratio was held constant at 566, while collection efficiencies ranging from 45% to 60% were
examined. For the VNB alignment, all cases except the 45% collection efficiency configuration achieved
sustained flight, consistent with the results previously obtained for the WRF frame with DSMC-based


                     Table 5. Initial state of the EULO spacecraft in J2000 coordinates.

                                 Component            X        Y        Z
                                 Position [km]      152.6    -729.2   6576.0
                                 Velocity [km/s]    -7.596   -1.590   0.000
                                 Epoch (J2000)       01 Jan 2000, 12:00 TT


             The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                            London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                                Page 17
              Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
Figure 13. Variation of the minimum total compression required to meet the thruster density flow requirement
for EULO with 50% intake efficiency.




Figure 14. Orbital propagation of the 45% collection efficiency case under different shadowing assumptions.




             The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                            London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                             Page 18
              Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
Figure 15. Flight envelope of the EULO spacecraft with 50% collection efficiency under different frame
alignments.



shadowing.
    The resulting flight envelopes for the 50% collection efficiency case are shown in Fig. 15. It can be
observed that the DSMC-based shadowing case in the WRF frame and the VNB-aligned model produced
similar outcomes. This similarity is attributed to the polar orbit used in the simulations, where the satellite
orientation occasionally introduced misalignments of up to 4◦ . As a result, the aerodynamic forces in both
frames evolved in a comparable manner. For completeness, the corresponding ray-tracing-based shadowing
case is also included in Fig. 15. In summary, the flight simulations demonstrated that sustained operation
of the EULO spacecraft is possible under the considered conditions, provided that intake efficiencies remain
above 50%. Nevertheless, the assumptions adopted in this analysis represent an optimistic scenario. Given
the uncertainties associated with aerodynamic drag modelling and the fact that many cases operate near the
margin of feasibility, more efficient thrusters may be required in practice to ensure a successful mission.

                                           VI.     Conclusions
    This study investigated the design and feasibility of an Air-Breathing Electric Propulsion (ABEP)
spacecraft initially intended for sustained operations at an altitude range of approximately 190 to 250 km.
The spacecraft was specifically designed for optical Earth observation missions and sized to be compatible
with launch from a UK-based launcher, RS-1. Preliminary analyses indicated that at least two thrusters
would be required to meet the propulsion demands, based on existing RIT-10 performance data tested with
N2 -O2 mixtures.5 However, due to constraints on spacecraft length and the relatively large payload volume
required by the optical instruments, the final design was adapted to incorporate three thrusters, each fed by
an independent smaller intake system.
    Due to the inclusion of three intake units, a nonagonal spacecraft body was selected with an inner
diameter of 1.6 m. The solar panels were designed considering the worst-case power demand scenario;
however, the body-mounted panels alone would be insufficient to supply power to three thrusters operating
simultaneously. Consequently, additional deployable solar arrays were implemented. Six deployable panels
were designed to fold and stow against the spacecraft body. Three of them were used as cranked panels
deployed from the body while the other three panels were configured as tail units. The authors acknowledge
that the tail-mounted panels may be subject to plasma plume interactions caused by the electric propulsion
system. This effect was beyond the scope of the present study and is identified as an area for future research,

             The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                            London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                                Page 19
              Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
which may lead to further design modifications. However, in its current configuration, these deployable tail
units could also serve as aerodynamic brakes or as control surfaces for attitude management.
    Previously developed orbital propagator for Very Low Earth Orbit (VLEO)7 was enhanced with a
faster pseudo-shadowing algorithm by incorporating a bounding volume hierarchy (BVH) logic into the
original approach proposed by Ref. 14, enabling a faster assessment of complex meshes. In addition to the
velocity–normal–binormal (VNB) frame alignment used in the previous study,7 a new attitude strategy was
investigated in which the satellite is assumed to be perfectly aligned with the instantaneous free-stream
velocity. Furthermore, this study introduced a simple variability in the intake collection efficiency due to
flow misalignment, and switched from a fixed mg/s mass flow rate to an sccm based mass flow limit, which
yielded more favourable results compared to the prior work.7 Similarly, limits on mass flow and number
density was also imposed on the thrusters.
    The generic assessment of an ABEP spacecraft using a GOCE-like shape revealed that some orbits were
only marginally stable, with the flow angles induced by the VNB frame alignment causing the satellite to
de-orbit, whereas the same scenario in the WRF frame sustained flight. This emphasizes the importance of
proper satellite flow alignment. It should be noted that, due to the polar orbit employed, these angles varied
by up to approximately 4◦ , primarily as a result of the Earth’s co-rotation. The authors also acknowledge
that these cases were controlled with a misaligned thruster, since the thruster is body-mounted; providing
the thruster with an independent degree of freedom could modify the results. Furthermore, similar to the
previous study,7 the present analysis also highlighted that a passive intake collection unit alone may not be
sufficient to sustain the satellite’s orbit.
    The ABEP spacecraft EULO, designed in this study, was analysed for aerodynamic performance using
both TPMC and panel-based methods. During the design phase, it became evident that a larger satellite
configuration than originally planned was required. Consequently, the minimum altitude at which EULO
was capable of sustaining flight was found to be approximately 240 km, based on the balance between total
thrust and aerodynamic drag. Therefore, the aerodynamic analysis were performed assuming a representative
atmospheric environment at 240 km.
    The aerodynamic investigation using the ray-tracing panel (RTP) method revealed that, as previously
noted by the original developers,14 the pseudo ray-tracing model failed under zero-degree flow incidence.
To assess the aerodynamics using a panel-based approach, Blender23 was employed to identify shadowed
areas and manually remove panels that were occluded according to the shadowing algorithm. However,
comparison with the TPMC analysis highlighted a limitation of panel methods: components located behind
the nose cone, which should have been fully shadowed, were still predicted to experience aerodynamic forces,
potentially due to thermal motion of particles and multiple scattering effects.
    Subsequently, an alternative shadowing approach was applied by removing parts of the CAD model
that were predicted to contribute less than 1% of the overall aerodynamic pressure by a TPMC simulation.
Unfortunately, both the original and modified approaches either under- or over-predicted the aerodynamic
forces. Conversely, for angles above 0.001◦ , the RTP method produced predictions with approximately 1%
relative error. Nevertheless, it must be noted that panel-based approaches fail to capture double-scattering
behaviour, which was clearly exhibited in the TPMC results, and the precise shadowing mechanism still
differed between the TPMC and RTP methods.
    Nonetheless, as it was computationally infeasible to use a TPMC simulation within the orbital propagator,
a panel-based approach was employed. In this method, a limitation was introduced to prevent the flow angle
from approaching zero by effectively imposing small angle perturbations below a defined threshold. All
aerodynamic models and frame alignments were tested using the control methodology previously suggested by
Ref. 7 with the same constant solar weather conditions. It was observed that, for the satellite to sustain flight,
the intake efficiency must be at least 50% for reliability. Although the ray-tracing-based WRF shadowing
correction enabled the satellite to successfully complete 300 days in orbit with 45% collection efficiency,
the results showed roughly a 5% relative error on aerodynamic force compared to the TPMC predictions.
Therefore, it is safer to assume a minimum collection efficiency of 50%. Additional investigations were
conducted by removing the number density requirement from the thruster. This analysis indicated that
a compression ratio of approximately 566 is required for the satellite to maintain its orbit, which was
subsequently verified through orbit simulations.
    For the EULO spacecraft, the mean operational altitude was approximately 255 km across the different
simulated cases. Consequently the ground sampling distance for the optical payload becomes 0.38 m. Both
the WRF alignment with DSMC-based shadowing and the VNB frame alignment with shadowing produced


             The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                            London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                                   Page 20
              Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
similar results, which is attributed to the effective flow angle reaching up to roughly 4◦ in the VNB frame
alignment due to the polar orbit and the Earth’s co-rotation. In contrast, for the WRF alignment using ray-
tracing based shadowing, the satellite maintained the same mean altitude but exhibited a slightly lower orbital
eccentricity and more fluctuation in the semi-major axis. These results indicate that there are significant
uncertainties associated with the ABEP spacecraft orbits. To mitigate the fluctuations and uncertainties
caused by drag prediction, density modelling, and related factors, it would be beneficial to improve thruster
efficiency, allowing for a reduction in solar panel area.
     Furthermore, the requirement for high compression ratios suggests that these thrusters could benefit
from operation at lower plasma densities. This could potentially allow the use of purely passive intake units;
however, even with 50% collection efficiency, alternative materials would likely be needed for the intakes to
create specular reflections which could potentially enable these collection efficiencies.

                                                  Acknowledgments
    This paper presented the outcomes of various ABEP development activities carried out at the Surrey
Space Centre (SSC) with funding from the United Kingdom Space Agency (UKSA)’s Enabling Technologies
Programme under project “EULO”. Additionally, Hamza Eren Gunaltay would like to express sincere
gratitude to the University of Surrey and Surrey Satellite Technologies Ltd. (SSTL) for funding their PhD
research.

                                                        References
      1 Tisaev, M., Ferrato, E., Giannetti, V., Paissoni, C., Baresi, N., Lucca Fabris, A., and Andreussi, T., “Air-breathing

electric propulsion: Flight envelope identification and development of control for long-term orbital stability,” Acta Astronautica,
Vol. 191, 2022, pp. 374–393.
      2 NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, “General Mission Analysis Tool (GMAT),” 2023, Accessed: 2024-12-16.
      3 Crisp, N., Roberts, P., Livadiotti, S., Oiko, V., Edmondson, S., Haigh, S., Huyton, C., Sinpetru, L., Smith, K., Worrall,

S., Becedas, J., Domı́nguez, R., González, D., Hanessian, V., Mølgaard, A., Nielsen, J., Bisgaard, M., Chan, Y.-A., Fasoulas,
S., Herdrich, G., Romano, F., Traub, C., Garcı́a-Almiñana, D., Rodrı́guez-Donaire, S., Sureda, M., Kataria, D., Outlaw, R.,
Belkouchi, B., Conte, A., Perez, J., Villain, R., Heißerer, B., and Schwalber, A., “The benefits of very low earth orbit for earth
observation missions,” Progress in Aerospace Sciences, Vol. 117, 2020, pp. 100619.
      4 Gini, F., Otten, M., Springer, T. A., Enderle, W., Lemmens, S., and Flohrer, T., “Precise Orbit Determination of the

GOCE Re-Entry Phase,” Tech. rep., European Space Agency (ESA), 2015, Accessed: 2024-12-15.
      5 Lotz, B., Collingwood, C., and Feili, D., “Radio Frequency Ion Thrusters Operated with Non-Conventional Propellants,”

Trudy MAI , Vol. 60, 2012, Accessed: 2024-12-16.
      6 Dhillon, V., “Reflectors,” http://www.vikdhillon.staff.shef.ac.uk/teaching/phy217/telescopes/phy217 tel reflectors.html,

2013, Accessed: 2025-09-03.
      7 Gunaltay, H. E., Lucca Fabris, A., Underwood, C., Marxen, O., Gini, F., and Baresi, N., “A high-fidelity orbit propagator

and control strategy for VLEO platforms,” Proceedings of the 2nd International Symposium on Very Low Earth Orbit Missions
and Technologies, Stuttgart, Germany, January 2025.
      8 ABL Space Systems, “ABL Payload User’s Guide,” https://ablspacesystems.com/wp-content/uploads/2022/06/

ABL-Payload-Users-Guide-2022-V1.pdf, 2022, Accessed 2025-04-01.
      9 Montenbruck, O. and Gill, E., Satellite Orbits: Models, Methods and Applications, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, 2000.
     10 Kaula, W. M., Theory of Satellite Geodesy: Applications of Satellites to Geodesy, Dover Publications, New York, 1966.
     11 for Global Earth Models (ICGEM), I. C., “ICGEM Gravity Field Service Data,” 2016, Accessed: 2024-12-16.
     12 Acton, C. H., “Ancillary Data Services of NASA’s Navigation and Ancillary Information Facility,” Tech. Rep. 44(1),

Planetary and Space Science, 1996, Accessed: 2025-08-08.
     13 Picone, J. M., Hedin, A. E., Drob, D. P., and Aikin, A. C., “NRLMSISE-00 empirical model of the atmosphere: Statistical

comparisons and scientific issues,” Journal of Geophysical Research: Space Physics, Vol. 107, No. A12, 2002, pp. SIA 15–1–SIA
15–16.
     14 Sinpetru, L. A., Crisp, N. H., Mostaza-Prieto, D., Livadiotti, S., and Roberts, P. C., “ADBSat: Methodology of a novel

panel method tool for aerodynamic analysis of satellites,” Computer Physics Communications, Vol. 275, 2022, pp. 108326.
     15 Schaaf, S. and Chambre, P., Flow of Rarefied Gases, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ, 1st ed., 1958.
     16 Lapointe, J., Adaptive Estimation Techniques for Resident Space Object Characterization, Ph.D. thesis, 12 2016.
     17 Meister, D., Ogaki, S., Benthin, C., Doyle, M. J., Guthe, M., and Bittner, J., “A Survey on Bounding Volume Hierarchies

for Ray Tracing,” Computer Graphics Forum (Eurographics STAR Report), Vol. 40, No. 2, 2021, pp. 683–712.
     18 Li, Z., Ziebart, M., Bhattarai, S., Harrison, D., and Grey, S., “Fast solar radiation pressure modelling with ray tracing

and multiple reflections,” Advances in Space Research, Vol. 61, No. 9, 2018, pp. 2352–2365.
     19 NVIDIA Corporation, CUDA Toolkit Documentation, 2025, Version 13.0, Accessed: 2025-09-01.
     20 FUJITA, K., “Air-intake Performance Estimation of Air-breathing Ion Engines,” Transactions of the Japan Society of

Mechanical Engineers Series B , Vol. 70, No. 700, 2004, pp. 3038–3044.
     21 Schaub, H. and Junkins, J. L., Analytical Mechanics of Space Systems, AIAA, 2003.




               The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                              London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                                                 Page 21
                Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
   22 Plimpton, S. J., Moore, S. G., Borner, A., Stagg, A. K., Koehler, T. P., Torczynski, J. R., and Gallis, M. A., “Direct

Simulation Monte Carlo on Petaflop Supercomputers and Beyond,” Physics of Fluids, Vol. 31, No. 8, 2019, pp. 086101.
   23 Blender Foundation, “Blender,” https://www.blender.org/, Version: 4.0, Accessed: 2025-01-01.




               The 39th International Electric Propulsion Conference, Imperial College London
                              London, United Kingdom 14–19 September 2025                                          Page 22
                Copyright 2025 by the Electric Rocket Propulsion Society. All rights reserved.
